docs: add Fully type-aware linting for Astro, Svelte, and Vue blog post (#2456)
flint-fyi/flint: packages/site/src/content/docs/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue.mdx

---
authors:
  name: auvred
  title: Maintainer
  picture: /team/auvred.webp
  url: https://github.com/auvred
date: 2026-03-11
excerpt:
  The traditional ESLint approach to linting TS-based languages has been a pain for a very long time.
  It is hard to configure, and it has a lot of limitations that don't allow type-aware rules to work as well as they should.
  Learn how Flint's architecture solves this once and for all!

> title: Flawless type-aware linting for Astro, Svelte, and Vue

Reviewer: Oh boy finding the right balance of clickbait-y-ness is such a struggle... I still wish I'd figured out something slightly less extravagant for https://typescript-eslint.io/blog/typed-linting.

Although "flawless" is technically correct in reference to just the _types_ in linting, I suspect using it here makes it seem like we're claiming that _all Flint linting_ (for these languages) is flawless. Which is a bit more than we should.

Maybe... _"Fully"_ instead of _"Flawless"_?

	}
	const hello = "Hello world!";
</script>

<template>
	<button
		@click="
			() => {
				log(hello);
			}
		"
	>
		Click me!
	</button>
</template>
```

Notice how the `@click` event listener is a JS expression that uses variables declared in `<script>`.
In order to lint this JS expression _properly_, we need the ability to resolve the types used inside it.

Unfortunately, it's not as simple as concatenating all JS expressions into one big file.
Embedded JS expressions rely on many language-specific quirks that must be taken into account.

Take, for example, the following code:

```vue "data"
<template>
	<MyComponent v-slot="{ data }">
		{{ data.text }}
	</MyComponent>
</template>
```

`data` comes from `MyComponent`'s `v-slot`.
To know its type, we must resolve the type of `MyComponent`, extract its `v-slot` type, and so on.
This is why naive concatenation wouldn't work.

This problem is solved by [@johnsoncodehk](https://github.com/johnsoncodehk)'s [`tsslint`](https://github.com/johnsoncodehk/tsslint) (thanks to Volar.js!).
However, the first problem (`any`-typed imports) is still present in this project.

## How the TypeScript compiler works with extension languages

> At some point, every extension-language author wants to type-check their language with TypeScript.

Author: Ohh, right, I changed it to "TS-based language" everywhere

It will help us understand how custom syntax is translated into TS code.

![Volar.js virtual generated code](../../../assets/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue/volar-virtual-code.webp)

As you may notice, all embedded JS expressions, including code from the `<script>` block, are merged into a single TS file.
They're also transformed in order to be type-checkable.
For example, variables declared in `<script setup>` are prefixed with `__VLS_ctx.` when used in `<template>`.
Thanks to this, the type of every identifier used in the `@click` handler can be resolved to its actual value.

This is how `vue-tsc` type-checks `.vue` files internally!

## How Flint utilizes Volar.js for type-aware linting

The new `@flint.fyi/volar-language` package allows creating extension languages with ease.
In order to add support for a new extension language, a plugin author must provide:

- A list of custom file extensions
- Volar.js language plugin
- Optional extra properties that are passed to the rule context

We will explore three stages of linting.

### Initialization

Initialization of an extension language happens implicitly.

Take a look at the example Flint config:

> ```typescript "import '@flint.fyi/vue'"

Author: Oh, yeah, I typed `'` because of habit, and then Prettier changed it to `"`

// flint.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from "flint";
import "@flint.fyi/vue";

export default defineConfig({
	// ...
});
```

> It may seem that nothing is happening here, however, `import '@flint.fyi/vue'` performs a few very important side-effects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may seem that nothing is happening here; however, `import '@flint.fyi/vue'` performs a few very important side-effects.
```

```typescript /services.vue(?= )/ "sfc"
ruleCreator.createRule(vueLanguage, {
	setup(context) {
		return {
			visitors: {
				SourceFile(node, services) {
					if (services.vue == null) {
						// we're linting .ts file
					} else {
						const { sfc } = services.vue;
						// we're linting .vue file
					}
				},
			},
		};
	},
});
```

Since the Vue language in Flint is a superset of the TS language, lint rule authors can use both Vue and TS ASTs in order to perform type-aware linting of Vue `<template>`s!

Another benefit of the TS language being a strict subset of the Vue language is that all TS-only lint rules can work on all JS expressions in `.vue` files even if they weren't intended to work there.

To sum up, both Vue and TS files are linted as if they were TS files.
However, when rules are run on Vue files, they can optionally access the original Vue file AST, the original source text of the `.vue` file, and so on.

## Flint in action!

Let's explore how all of this works!

We have the following project layout:

```
package.json
flint.config.ts
src/
	index.ts
	comp.vue
```

Now, let's look at `flint.config.ts`:

```typescript "ts.files.all, vue.files.all" {11-17}

> // flint.config.ts

Author: https://expressive-code.com/key-features/frames/#file-name-comments

It works with both `//` comments and `title=`

// src/index.ts

import comp from "./comp.vue";

function vueComponent() {
	return comp;
}

declare const anyValue: any;
function any() {
	return anyValue;
}
```

Here, we're interested in the results produced by the [`ts/anyReturns`](/rules/ts/anyreturns) rule.
It reports `return X` statements where the type of `X` is `any`.

In this file, we have two possible candidates for a report.

1. `return comp` -- returns a Vue component.
This line is reported by ESLint.
However, we would like Flint not to report it, since this is a legitimate usage.
2. `return anyValue` -- returns `any`-typed value.
This is unsafe, so we would like this return statement to be reported.

Let's proceed to `src/comp.vue`:

```vue "anyFunction()" 'v-for="i in 3"'
// src/comp.vue

<script lang="ts" setup>
	declare const anyFunction: any;
</script>

<template>
	<button
		@click="
			() => {
				anyFunction();
			}
		"
	>
		Click me!
	</button>

	<div v-for="i in 3"></div>
</template>
```

Here, we're calling `anyFunction` whose type is `any`; we want [`ts/anyCalls`](/rules/ts/anycalls) rule to catch this unsafe behavior.
Notice how this function is called from the JS expression embedded in the `<template>`.

> ESLint is unable to catch this.

Reviewer 2: ...without typescript-eslint-parser-for-extra-files?

In addition, we introduced `<div v-for="i in 3"></div>`, which lacks a `:key` directive.
This is unsafe, so we would like Flint to report it as well.

And finally, let's run Flint:

```ansi

> > pnpm flint --presenter detailed

Reviewer 2: Oh, and Josh has been calling the CLI `npx flint` over in #2433. I'll still voice my opposition to naming us after an npm-specfic detail, but if we call it `npx flint` we might as well align with that over here.

---
authors:
  name: auvred
  title: Maintainer
  picture: /team/auvred.webp
  url: https://github.com/auvred
date: 2026-03-18

> excerpt:

Reviewer: This looks like the general description, not the specific excerpt?

```suggestion
description:
```

I've -somewhat irritatingly- had to copy & paste & reduce the `excerpt` in other blog posts.

  The traditional ESLint approach to linting TS-based languages has been a pain for a very long time.
  It is hard to configure, and it has a lot of limitations that don't allow type-aware rules to work as well as they should.
  Learn how Flint's architecture solves this once and for all!
title: Flawless type-aware linting for Astro, Svelte, and Vue
---

## What are TS-based languages?

> Frontend frameworks often introduce their own languages, which extend basic TypeScript syntax with custom features in order to ease the web-development.

Reviewer: Proofreading:

* Grammar: it's "that", not ", which". This is a restrictive clause (it defines which languages), so it shouldn’t be set off by a comma.
* Trimming: "in order to ease the web-development" is implied (why else would they do it?). Also, the "the" should be removed.

```suggestion
Frontend frameworks often introduce their own languages that extend basic TypeScript syntax with custom features.
```

React, Solid, and similar frameworks are exceptions to this pattern, because they rely only on TSX/JSX and do not introduce new syntax.
The TypeScript compiler supports `.tsx` and `.jsx` files natively, so any linter rule that works for `.ts` is capable of linting `.tsx` without any loss in functionality.

However, some frameworks extend pure TypeScript syntax with their language-specific additions.
This means that files written in such languages can't be linted by TS-only rules as is.

> Moreover, they introduce non-standard file extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSX-based frameworks like React and Solid.js natively work with the TypeScript compiler's `.jsx` and `.tsx` file support.
But more extensive frameworks like Astro, Solid, and Vue that add language-specific additions and non-standard file extensions need more tooling to work well with TypeScript.
```

Linting these languages from a _syntax-only_ perspective is not that hard.
We can call the corresponding parser to get the AST and report errors based on AST visiting only.

However, syntax-only linting is often not enough to catch all bugs.

> That's why people seek a way to enable [type-aware linting](https://typescript-eslint.io/blog/typed-linting) for these languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traditional linters such as ESLint have been able to work with those languages on a _syntax-only_ level.
They can use the languages' provided parsers to get an AST for the languages' contents and report errors purely based on that AST.

However, syntax-only linting is often not enough to catch all bugs.
[Type-aware linting](https://typescript-eslint.io/blog/typed-linting) allows for significantly more powerful lint rules -- but requires more deep integrations with TypeScript tooling.
```

> What's the current state of type-aware linting for TS-based languages?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited to say that Flint is the first modern linter with full support for typed linting on extension languages.
Flint uses Volar.js to integrate TypeScript with extension languages, giving lint rules to full type information even in embedded JavaScript expressions within language-specific files.
This represents a big leap forward in linting for these languages.
```

## `no-unsafe-*` rules and embedded JS expressions

This applies to all type-aware rules, but `@typescript-eslint/no-unsafe-*` rules break more often than others.
The problem is that imports from files with custom extensions aren't supported by TypeScript natively.

> So all imports from [`.astro`](https://github.com/ota-meshi/eslint-plugin-astro/issues/348), [`.svelte`](https://github.com/sveltejs/eslint-plugin-svelte/issues/1150), or [`.vue`](https://github.com/vuejs/vue-eslint-parser/issues/104) files are resolved to `any` when files are parsed using `@typescript-eslint/parser`.

Reviewer: I think most users aren't familiar enough with typed linting to know why `no-unsafe-*` rules are special here and get tripped up by trying to understand that factoid. But as you note, they're not really special! I don't think we need to call them out.

```suggestion
## Problem Statement: Typed Linting Rules and Embedded JavaScript Expressions

Most linters today directly call to TypeScript's type checker for type information on all source files.
This works well for file types such as `.js`, `.ts`, and `.tsx` that TypeScript natively supports.
The problem is that imports from files with custom extensions aren't supported by TypeScript natively.
So all imports from [`.astro`](https://github.com/ota-meshi/eslint-plugin-astro/issues/348), [`.svelte`](https://github.com/sveltejs/eslint-plugin-svelte/issues/1150), or [`.vue`](https://github.com/vuejs/vue-eslint-parser/issues/104) files are resolved to `any` when files are parsed.
```

Author: > I think most users aren't familiar enough with typed linting to know why `no-unsafe-*` rules are special here

Based on my experience, (_almost_) everyone who has used the `no-unsafe-*` rules with these frameworks has stumbled upon this problem at least once.
I believe this set of rules is widely known to be problematic with TS-based languages (for example, all three linked issues report problems with `no-unsafe-*` rules)

I like your new wording better, but I still think we should at least mention the `no-unsafe-*` rules to help readers recognize the problem we're trying to solve?

Reviewer: Yeah makes sense! Having them as an exemplar "see, this is an example & why you should care!" sounds good to me.

In order to lint this JS expression _properly_, we need the ability to resolve the types used inside it.

Unfortunately, it's not as simple as concatenating all JS expressions into one big file.
Embedded JS expressions rely on many language-specific quirks that must be taken into account.

Take, for example, the following code:

```vue "data"
<template>
	<MyComponent v-slot="{ data }">
		{{ data.text }}
	</MyComponent>
</template>
```

`data` comes from `MyComponent`'s `v-slot`.
To know its type, we must resolve the type of `MyComponent`, extract its `v-slot` type, and so on.
This is why naive concatenation wouldn't work.

[Johnson Chu](https://github.com/johnsoncodehk)'s [`tsslint`](https://github.com/johnsoncodehk/tsslint) used Volar.js to solve this problem, though the first problem (`any`-typed imports) is still present.

## How the TypeScript compiler works with TS-based languages

At some point, every TS-based-language author wants to type-check their language with TypeScript.
There are two main difficulties here:

1. TypeScript should perform type-checking of syntax it's unaware of

> 2. TypeScript's module resolution system should be able to resolve custom file extensions (so they are not resolved to `any`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Getting TypeScript to perform type-checking of syntax it's unaware of (so they do not get skipped or throw errors)
2. Resolving custom file extensions in TypeScript's extising module resolution  system (so they are not resolved to `any`)
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Getting TypeScript to perform type-checking of syntax it's unaware of (so they do not get skipped or throw errors)
2. Resolving custom file extensions in TypeScript's existing module resolution system (so they are not resolved to `any`)
```

	</button>
</template>

<style lang="css">
	button {
		font-size: 30px;
		color: red;
	}
</style>
```

As you may have noticed, this file contains blocks with three different languages: TypeScript (`<script lang="ts">`), HTML (`<template>`), and CSS (`<style lang="css">`).
The HTML block also has an embedded TypeScript/JavaScript expression inside it.

The purpose of Volar.js is to provide language tool authors with a high-level framework that handles all the complexities -- such as LSP integration, routing of LSP requests to the appropriate embedded language service, type-checking powered by TypeScript, and much more -- so that they can avoid reinventing this _difficult_ wheel again.

But we're particularly interested in its type-checking abilities.

Volar.js allows language authors to create "language plugins" which serve two important purposes:

- They describe custom file extensions
- They translate custom language syntax into pure TS code that can be type-checked by the TypeScript compiler

Volar.js ships a nice VS Code extension called [Volar Labs](https://volarjs.dev/core-concepts/volar-labs/).
It will help us understand how custom syntax is translated into TS code.

> ![Volar.js virtual generated code](../../../assets/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue/volar-virtual-code.webp)

Reviewer: WDYT about using Mermaid for these? https://github.com/joesaby/astro-mermaid

It'd be more interactive & more accessible.

> As you may notice, all embedded JS expressions, including code from the `<script>` block, are merged into a single TS file.

Reviewer: _"As you may notice,"_ is redundant at best and intimidating at worst. Either users already noticed and don't need this extra verbiage (best) or they didn't and it may sadden them to learn that others might be noticing things they're not.

Instead of asking users to notice something after-the-fact, I'd prep them ahead-of-time for what they're going to see:

```suggestion
```

```suggestion
Here's a screenshot showing a `file.vue` source file on the left, compared to the generated `script_ts.ts` equivalent on the right.
All of `file.vue`'s embedded JavaScript expressions, including code from its `<script>` block, are merged into that single TS file.

![Volar.js virtual generated code](../../../assets/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue/volar-virtual-code.webp)

```

## How Flint utilizes Volar.js for type-aware linting

The new `@flint.fyi/volar-language` package allows creating TS-based languages with ease.
In order to add support for a new language, a plugin author must provide:

- A list of custom file extensions
- Volar.js language plugin
- Optional extra properties that are passed to the rule context

We will explore three stages of linting.

### Initialization

Initialization of a language happens implicitly.

Take a look at the example Flint config:

```typescript 'import "@flint.fyi/vue"'
// flint.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from "flint";
import "@flint.fyi/vue";

export default defineConfig({
	// ...
});
```

It may seem that nothing is happening here; however, `import '@flint.fyi/vue'` performs a few very important side-effects.

<div class="only-light">

![@flint.fyi/vue-language initialization sequence diagram](../../../assets/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue/language-initialization.webp)

</div>

<div class="only-dark">

![@flint.fyi/vue-language initialization sequence diagram](../../../assets/blog/flawless-type-aware-linting-for-astro-svelte-and-vue/language-initialization-dark.webp)

> </div>

Author: Yeah, I thought about it, but it would add extra client-side JavaScript. We'll probably use it elsewhere in the future, though, so I'll give it a try!

Rule authors can distinguish between `.ts` and `.vue` files by the presence of the `services.vue` property.

For `.vue` files, `services.vue` provides the Vue SFC AST as well as other handy items.

```typescript /services.vue(?= )/ "sfc"
ruleCreator.createRule(vueLanguage, {
	setup(context) {
		return {
			visitors: {
				SourceFile(node, services) {
					if (services.vue == null) {
						// we're linting .ts file
					} else {
						const { sfc } = services.vue;
						// we're linting .vue file
					}
				},
			},
		};
	},
});
```

Since the Vue language in Flint is a superset of the TS language, lint rule authors can use both Vue and TS ASTs in order to perform type-aware linting of Vue `<template>`s!

Another benefit of the TS language being a strict subset of the Vue language is that all TS-only lint rules can work on all JS expressions in `.vue` files even if they weren't intended to work there.

To sum up, both Vue and TS files are linted as if they were TS files.
However, when rules are run on Vue files, they can optionally access the original Vue file AST, the original source text of the `.vue` file, and so on.

## Flint in action!

> Let's explore how all of this works!

Author: I think a separate repository/e2e test fixture directory would indeed be useful, but all the code blocks are pretty critical here (?) I tried to make them as concise as possible...

Without concrete examples, it would probably be hard to understand how it works.

At the very least, it's important to show that `flint.config.ts` is super simple, even with Vue language support (compared to ESLint)

Also, without the code blocks, the output of `npx flint` probably wouldn't be understandable at all...

---

However, if you insist, I'm fine with removing all of this from the blog post. What should we leave in `## Flint in action!` then? Only the link and the output of `npx flint` with a brief high level overview?

[90m│ [39m
[90m│ [39m [38;2;130;164;130m[3m→ flint.fyi/rules/vue/vforkeys[23m[39m
[90m│ [39m
[90m╰[39m

[31m✖ Found [1m3 reports[22m across [1m2 files[22m.[39m
```

Cool! What do we have here:

1. `function vueComponent() { return comp }` is not reported!
   The type of the `comp` identifier is resolved to a valid Vue component type.
It's no longer an `any`.
2. `function any() { return anyValue }` is reported by [`ts/anyReturns`](/rules/ts/anyreturns).
This shows us that `return comp` wasn't reported not because the rule is broken.
In fact, it's functioning as expected, reporting all `any`-typed values returned from functions.
3. `@click="() => { anyFunction() }"` in Vue `<template>` is reported by the [`ts/anyCalls`](/rules/ts/anycalls) rule.
We can see that the TS-only rule works in Vue templates just fine!
4. `<div v-for="i in 3"></div>` is reported by `vue/vForKeys`.
Vue rules can access the Vue AST and analyze it.

## What's next

This was an early technical preview of what Flint is capable of.
The next steps for Flint are:

- Stabilize TS-based languages support

> - Discover potential edge cases of the Volar.js-based linting approach

Reviewer: I think _"Discover potential edge cases"_ is implied whenever you're working in some new area/implementation. Is there anything specific on your mind? If not:

```suggestion
```

- Implement all Astro, Svelte, and Vue rules in their Flint plugins
- Consider adding support for other TS-based languages, such as MDX, Ember, and others.

> In the meantime, you can try Flint by running `npx flint`.

Reviewer: Haha I think keeping the same works totally fine. Hooray for consistency!

> You can read more about how to use Flint [here](/about).

Reviewer: [Accessibility] https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/link-purpose-in-context.html - links should explain what they are out-of-context, for folks who jump around based on them.

```suggestion
You can read more about how to use Flint in [Flint > About](/about).
```
